Bujinkan Leadership and Wisdom

Soke = Grandmaster

[SOKESHIP]
Koto Ryu Koppojutsu | Noguchi Yukio | 2024 | Named Soke of Koto Ryū Koppojutsu
Gyokko Ryu Koshijutsu | Ishizuka Tetsuji | 2020 | Named Soke of Gyokko Ryu Kosshijutsu
Shinden Fudo Ryu Dakentaijutsu | Nagato Toshiro | 2020 | Named Soke of Shinden Fudo Ryu Dakentaijutsu
Takagi Yoshin Ryu Jutaijutsu | Sakasai Norio | 2020 | Named Soke of Takagi Yoshin Ryu Jutaijutsu
Gikan Ryu Koppojutsu | Sakasai Norio | 2020 | Named Soke
Togakure Ryu Ninpo Taijutsu | Tsutsui Takumi | 2020 | Named Soke of Togakure Ryu Ninpo Taijutsu
Gikan Ryu Koppojutsu | Kan Junichi | 2020 | Named Soke of Gikan Ryu Koppojutsu
Kumogakure Ryu Ninpo Taijutsu | Furuta Koji | 2020 | Named Soke of Kumogakure Ryu Ninpo Taijutsu
Kukishinden Ryu Happo Bikenjutsu | Yoshio Iwata |2020 | Named Soke of Kukishinden Ryu Happo Bikenjutsu
Bujinkan Budo Taijutsu | Hatsumi Masaaki | 1972 | Named Soke of Bujinkan Budo Taijutsu

---

In the Bujinkan, Hatsumi Soke's top teachers are called Shihan (師範), a Japanese term meaning "master instructor". 
Here's some additional information about the ranking system in the Bujinkan:
Shidoshi (師道師): Individuals who have achieved the rank of 5th dan and above are referred to as Shidoshi and are licensed teachers within the Bujinkan organization.
Dai Shihan (大師範): A more recent rank introduced by Soke Hatsumi, likely signifying senior Shihan who hold higher authority or expertise in specific areas of the art.
Buyukai (武友会): A reorganization of the membership structure, replacing the traditional Shidoshi-kai, aimed at fostering greater friendship and connections among Bujinkan members. 
In essence, Shihan signifies a high level of mastery and teaching ability, and those holding this title are recognized as top teachers within the Bujinkan. You may also encounter the term Dai Shihan, indicating an even higher level of experience and authority. 


The Martial Arts Instructors of Japan

Nothing can replicate training in Japan; the immersion in the Japanese culture, the amount of training one squeezes into a trip, the practitioners your surrounded by – a few days changes your movement forever. The most important part of training in Japan is the opportunity to train under the best instructors in the world and Soke Hatsumi himself.

For all of us – Soke is the goal; we are all trying to understand and to grasp how Soke moves. And each of the Sensei in Japan attempt to breakdown his movement into terms the rest of us can understand. At the same time though, each of the Sensei take the principles of Soke and make it their own. It’s a bit like two different painters looking at the same scenery and then painting it to make their own – both paintings can be accurate, and beautiful, but they both can be unique. This is how martial arts work as well; while the principles are the same the movement becomes unique to the practitioner.

Depending on what you’re working on, you may gravitate towards one teacher more than another – just as you may prefer one painter’s style over another. I would caution though not too simply “pick one”; each of the teachers have their strengths and focus that is important – and to not train under one would be to rob yourself of potential insight.


So the question becomes – who to train under? What are the insights each teacher offers? Here is an opinion on the different teachers, and what makes each one unique and valuable. This is only an opinion, and as I learn more and gain understanding, my opinion may change – but at a minimum this can give you a starting point if you never have trained in Japan and may help you find something that the teacher offers.


Let’s start with the Grandmaster himself – Soke Masaaki Hatsumi:


Hatsumi Sensei
The leader of the Bujinkan and the person we can thank for bringing the art to us is Soke Masaaki Hatsumi. I won’t pretend to grasp the lessons of Soke’s classes, but I think I may understand what he’s doing. Soke is always teaching to the Shihan, the highest level practitioners. This makes it difficult for the rest of us who aren’t quite ready for those lessons – like someone who has studied high-school physics sitting in on a lecture by Stephen Hawkings on String Theory. Yet, there are valuable lessons – that if you pay attention – you can grasp.

What Soke is teaching are not techniques, but rather ideas – a philosophy rather than a kata. This is why he talks about feeling; he wants us to recreate the feeling of a movement, not necessarily the movement itself. There is one caveat to this however; we have to go through all those kata and learned proper technique before we can begin to understand the principles within it, and start to play with his ideas.

Soke also has a devilishly funny – and sometimes even a bit dirty – sense of humor. You can tell that he truly enjoys teaching and sharing the art. This might be why after he demonstrates something, he always finishes with “hai okay play”.


An Aside
If you do get the opportunity to take a class with Soke, you will be pleasantly surprised to find out that in addition to being an amazing martial artist, Soke is also a very talented calligraphy artist. In fact if you bring a piece of paper Soke will draw something for you at the break in class. A word of warning though – Soke has a sense of humor, so if you try to get too clever, or just ask for anything – you might end up with a dirty picture (which is pretty awesome in and of itself).

Update
Hatsumi Sensei has retired from teaching and has passed on Sokeship of each of the schools. He still remains the leader of the Bujinkan overall.


Ishizuka Sensei
Ishizuka Sensei is one of the “first generation” of Japanese students of Soke. It’s only been recently that he has become better known in the Bujinkan community for the most recent generation. However, he has played a pivotal role in training many that have become the rest of the teachers we study under.

Ishizuka is nothing short of impressive; his movement is precise and fluid, powerful yet relaxed. He is very much a traditionalist – emphasizing proper kihon and technique. His style of teaching often involves the most senior student demonstrating a specific technique from a Ryuha, and then making small corrections in it’s execution. It’s then up to the rest of the class to drill the form.

The training is his relatively small dojo is intense – but satisfying. The particular type of students he attracts are eager to drill the basics to truly learn the proper form. And his vast experience and willingness to teach it leave your technique and movement more polished.

Just training a handful of times at his dojo, I can see connections between the proper kihon and pretty much everything else being taught by Soke and the other Shihan. It feels like connecting to some root from which everything springs.


A Cool Character
Ishizuka is also just very cool – maybe because he is also a Jazz musician. The way he speaks combined with his relatively deeper voice hints at a balance between seriousness and playfulness. If you get invited to his class though, you better pay attention to how things are done. He will often go around watching students practice, and when he sees you do something he doesn’t like, he’ll immediately ask you “why are you doing it that way?” This is a rhetorical question of course. Then he might use you as an uke – or at least just do a technique on you: “A good experience…” he might say. While a bit nerve racking it helps to know he’s more than willing to correct mistakes he sees, and do it with a cool confidence that only a Jazz musician can.

Update
Ishizuka Sensei was made Soke of Gyokko Ryu Koshijutsu.


Seno Sensei
Seno is also a first generation student. His classes are probably the most frustrating on the first go around due to their precision and subtlety. Often only 3 to 4 techniques or forms are taught, and then the next 30+ minutes involves trying to figure out what and how he did what he did (and a lot of head scratching). You’ll soon realize that Seno is operating on a whole other level of subtlety and precision that is challenging to deconstruct. A few degrees of angle, a change of a few inches of foot placement, and suddenly the technique works flawlessly.

If he sees you struggling however, he’ll come over and give you hands on correction to help you find the hidden details; often this will involve him grabbing your belt and literally walking you through step by step of the technique. You wouldn’t think that someone this detail oriented would be as friendly as he is. But whenever he shows something, or is just interacting with you, there is always this air of humility and warmth to his presence.

 
A Demonstration of Skill
During the filming of the NHK World production of “Last Living Ninja”, a few of the Shihan were asked to demonstrate Omote Gyaku (and/or a henka of it). I had trained enough with most of them to have a general idea of how they moved – and they didn’t disappoint: each one was unique and amazing. Then it was Seno’s turn. I hadn’t trained enough with him to be able to imagine how it would look, so I was very curious to see his movement at speed.

What I ended up seeing was the kihon omote gyaku executed with fluidity and precision that resulted in his uke flying through the air. It was like seeing a true Omote Gyaku for the first time – I suddenly understood how it’s supposed to look in a fight with just the right timing, distance and precision. My jaw hit the floor. For all his humility, Seno is nothing short of a bad ass.

Update
Unfortunately Seno Sensei passed away in 2019. He is sorely missed.


Noguchi Sensei
Noguchi Sensei’s classes are maybe the most exhausting, but also the most “playful”. Noguchi Sensei’s movement is all about manipulation – he plays within the space to manipulate the reaction of the opponent. As this is happening, he is twisting your spine and locking you off balance. It borders on magic: he can make you miss a punch with the movement of a hand as if it were a Jedi mind trick.

In his class it’s mind overload; there is technique after technique and variation after variation. We once counted the number of things he showed, and we lost count after 80! Yet, it’s also fun – there is always some laughter from both humor and surprise when he is showing a technique. His playful attitude and joy in teaching will keep you engaged. He also will walk around the class and show each group something – giving insight into a small detail you might have missed. And when he does, there is always a smile and a laugh – all without saying a word in English.

His classes feel the most like Soke’s in the format and speed in which you move on from one technique to the next. And all the things he shows – manipulating the opponent – you can see Soke doing as well in class. It’s as much mental as it is physical.


A Feeling
When it came time to take the Godan test I was lucky enough to be tested by one of the Japanese Shihan – Noguchi Sensei. At the moment of the test, I can truly say I felt his intention when I rolled out of the way of the swinging sword. But it was a bit different than I expected: it felt like we were working together at the same time. I thought about how he likes to use dancing as a metaphor in his classes, and it did feel like a dance with him leading. He immediately came over and gave a warm smile and shook my hand as I sat in shock that I somehow passed. It’s a day I will never forget, and I thank him and Shiraishi Sensei for the opportunity.

Update
Noguchi Sensei has been named the Soke of Koto Ryu Koppojutsu.



Nagato Sensei
Arguably the most physically intimidating of the Shihan, Nagato Sensei has possibly the most fighting experience of the Japanese Shihan – as a former Judo teacher and Kickboxing Champion. However, he would say that his former training simply gave him bad habits he had to unlearn. He also has a very good sense of humor, and often will slip in a humorous comment here and there. While he takes the training seriously, and expects the students to the move correctly, he also has a very personable manner.


Nagato Sensei’s movement is remarkable in that he focuses on how to safely enter a technique. When initiating a technique, he is able to cover from just about any secondary attack, almost as if he is constantly setting a trap and waiting to see if the opponent takes the bait. A lot of his movements utilize distance to draw the attack out – throwing off the opponent’s balance, which aids in this method. This is often characterized by his method of recieving as if you were catching a ball: “if you can catch a baseball, you can catch a punch”.

Soke also does this in his techniques as well; in any technique he has already prepared for a subsequent attack and can move freely within the space safely. Interestingly enough, both Soke and Nagato Sensei have somewhat similar Martial Arts backgrounds prior to studying Ninpo.


An Experience
When you take a class, there is a certain honor in being the uke (the partner) for the teacher – it’s a privilege. It’ also a rare opportunity to experience what it’s truly like when someone of such a high caliber performs a technique on you. It demands your focus and attention. I had such an opportunity with Nagato Sensei.

It’s hard to explain what it felt like; it was almost like being in a cage with a lion. It was truly intimidating. I was surprised at how gentle he was when applying techniques – and surprised at how quickly he could inflict pain with ease. After he demonstrated a technique – I couldn’t remember what he did, and would go back to my training partner and say “okay what just happened”. My brain was in survival mode at that point.

For fun, he then used me to demonstrate the proper way to punch a chin; he kept saying “not like this, but like this” giving me a punch while my arms were wrapped up. It wasn’t hard like he was hurting me or trying to knock me out – he was just testing me a bit as well as having a little fun. Afterwards, we took a picture together and shared a laugh when I asked if I could take a “funny one with him”. However, I promised him I wouldn’t publicly display it. And one thing is for sure: when you make a promise to Nagato Sensei – you keep it.

Update
Nagato Sensei was named the Soke of Shinden Fudo Ryu Dakentaijutsu.


Shiraishi Sensei
Shiraishi Sensei is called “the Smiling Demon”; no matter what – he always has a smile on his face. Most western students traveling to Japan will notice – and appreciate – that he teaches his classes in both English and Japanese. You’ll also notice that he is often used as uke in Soke’s classes, and you can sense the deep respect and admiration he has for Soke.

Shiraishi Sensei is all about principle and balance. This is characterized by his method of “foot work, spine work, hand work”, where there’s always a shifting of balance onto one foot before moving the other. There is also a rotation of the hips as you shift your balance, lending to the “spinework” aspect of movement.

Not only is this movement extremely stable, but it’s also very sneaky – it’s hard for the opponent to sense where your moving as you confuse their balance. You can also see Soke using this movement if you watch his feet, although it’s extremely hard to catch since Soke performs it so subtly. As Shirashi Sensei would say “good foundation training this makes”.



An Honor
Shiraishi Sensei is the Shihan that recommended me for my Godan – an honor that I hope to live up to. The day of the test, he was gracious enough to be my training partner for Soke’s class: “relaxing training for your test” he said. Of course, it wasn’t as relaxing as it was exhausting, for the simple fact that I wanted to do my best so he could enjoy the class as well (it’s not every day you get to train with a Sensei). By far it was one of the most rewarding classes I’ve had, since Shiraishi Sensei helped point out what I would normally miss in Soke’s movements – it was eye opening. For the whole story about that, you can read my post on Passing the Godan.


Someya Sensei
Someya Sensei is a direct descendant of a Samurai family, and it shows. There’s an air of seriousness to his class that demands your focus and attention. Although, when the moment lends itself, you’re likely to share a good laugh about something that comes up in class.

Someya’s movement is precise – like the edge of a katana; it’s impeccable. If you’re curious about the “correct form” of a certain kata – watch how Someya Sensei shows it. He seems to teach the most from what is “written” in the scrolls. He is, as you would expect, the weapon’s specialist of the group; whether he is teaching a katana or naginata kata, he moves fluid yet maintaining incredible control. This is not just with weapons, but extends to his taijutsu and body movement.

He also is very detailed in what he teaches – especially when it comes to weapons. There are many subtle things in a kata that are important to make the technique actually effective, and there is also a historical reason for the methods of the kata. And if you don’t pay attention to some of these details, the technique will fall apart.


An Anecdote
One trip to Japan, a school from Ann Harbor Michigan came with us, and one of the teachers was telling a funny story about his heritage. He said “an Irishman will crawl through a mile of [excrement] because half way he’d look back and say to himself ‘might as well keep going – if I turn back now I still half the crawl the same distance and I’ll still get no potato’”. We then started walking towards Someya’s class at his school – a couple miles from the train station. On the radio it was talking about an incoming typhoon. Just so happens, we got to walk through the peak of it. Needless to say we were soaked by the time we arrived at Someya’s dojo – which was closed. We thought maybe we got the time wrong. So there we are laughing as the violent weather continues, hiding under the the roof on Somea’s dojo’s porch. Forty-five minutes go by, whensuddenly a beam of a flashlight comes from around the corner – it’s Somea Sensei. He takes one look at us and starts laughing. He goes over to Shihan Woodard and says quietly to him (in Japanese) “You know- there’s a typhoon passing over tokyo”. He had canceled the class, and was nice enough to call us a cab back to the station. While we waited, we talked and laughed, and got to get to know Somea Sensei a little better. That was our potato.



Sakasai Sensei
Sakasai is relatively new to teaching at the Honbu. From what I’m told he was a student of Noguchi. I was told his class was about Kihon – but I can tell you that it’s not the kind of kihon you think. Sakasai forms a bit of a bridge between the orthodox forms and the more fluid style movements you see of the other teachers and Soke himself.

The class is more focused than Noguchi Sensei’s class, but if you trained with either you’ll notice overlap. For example he will often use every student as an uke. However there is more repetition, a slower pace and more linear flow to absorb what is being taught. By the end of class, you’ll suddenly see a whole new side to the movement of our art, as well as be better equipped to follow along with other teacher’s training.

You’ll begin to see how to bridge the gap between the basics and the principles.


A Graciousness
Every time I’ve taken a class with Sakasai, he is super friendly and gracious: he actually thanked everyone for coming to his class. This showed a level of humility that is refreshing for someone of his skill level. Although his English is limited, he is always willing to engage in small talk (depending on how much Japanese you can speak). Just someone you know you’d like to hang out with in addition to learning from.

Update
Sakasai Sensei was made Soke of both Takagi Yoshin Ryu Jutaijutsu and Gikan Ryu Koppojutsu.

Final Thoughts on the Martial Arts Instructors

Training in the classes in Japan was always a dream of mine. And each of the above teachers are truly amazing. There are other martial arts teachers at the Hombu Dojo as well. However, I haven’t trained enough in their classes to give any perspective – something I hope to correct by my next trip to Japan.

As I said at the beginning, I suggest training with all of them. Each one is highly skilled and will offer insight into the art and the movements of Soke. Hopefully this can give you an idea of the spectacular training that can be found at the Bujinkan Hombu in Japan. Until then – keep training!

---

---

"I am teaching 'Shingitai Ichijou 心技体一情' (The bringing together of the spirit [shin 心], the technique [Gi 技] and the body [tai 技], into one [ichi 一])."
- Masaaki Hatsumi

---

"Strong" and "weak" are common words on martial artist's lips.
However, I make it a rule to advise my pupils that they should behave as squarely as possible. I advise my pupils to try not to overcome the enemy but to become men who can live. The movements of Ninpô taijutsu are not supposed to be seen as "strong" or "weak," but rather movements that bring one un or fortune.
Thus you must find the truth of Ninpô taijutsu that brings you un or opportunities. It is just like a dragon calls forth a cloud (also pronounced "un" in Japanese). When a dragon calls forth a cloud, it also causes a rainfall. There is an expression "sweet rainwater" in Buddhism.
Buddhists believe that taking a sip of this sweet rainwater makes one immortal. Similarly, a ninja's interpretation of the dragon's rainwater could be understood as the godsent water which confers immortality.
Dr Masaaki Hatsumi 
Essence of Ninjutsu - The Nine Traditions

---

"This training itself is the ever-changing transmission, and though it be called guidance (sendatsu 先達), it can also be seen through the homonym for a flash of inspiration (sendatsu 閃達.)This attitude toward evolution (shin-pen 進変) soon itself evolves into shinden (represented the characters for "god" and "initiation" 神伝), and you become aware that it is a life experience. And this is connected to the kamae of telepathy between student and teacher and the initiation into the way of Shinden Fudō Ryū; it is manifestly and joyfully connected to ikken hasso, biken isshun, and shizen shigoku."
宗家Hatsumi

---

"When I mention about Kihon Happo, I mean not only Taijutsu Kihon Happo, but also Kihon Happô for every aspect of your life."
- Masaaki Hatsumi Cit:, Book Understand? Good, Play!

---

THINK BY YOURSELF
– By Sôke Masaaki Hatsumi
In ancient times, a person who strove to learn budo would do individual keiko. After learning skills from his teacher, he trained himself to master those lessons. He had to have the determination to study through the techniques alone. Going into the mountains, he would repeat his solo training in nature, fighting with animals and trees.
These days, so many people forget to ‘go into the mountains.’ These people tend to desire the easy way out. If they are having problems that are complicated, they immediately ask someone older to solve it for them. Moreover, the elder gives them easy advice. Most people answer nicely because they think it would be good to help the situation along, but in fact, this often ends up hurting the individual`s growth.
It might be a little different from keiko in Budô, but some problems can only be understood by the person who has the problem. An advisor gives suggestions trying to solve the problem through applying his own experiences, while the listener ( who does not have those same experiences ) listens to the guidance as if it were being received from some divine being. There is sometimes a serious danger in missing a lesson`s important point. Therefore, you should sometimes offer the advice, ” Ponder the dilemma yourself.” You may consider this coldhearted. However, being cold illustrates the need to solve a problem ( finding warmth ). Perhaps some days later, the individual will return saying: “I can`t figure out a solution…” and he will recount his problem in a totally different manner than his first telling. You will now be able to discern how to offer advice that is more appropriate by judging from his revised account.
In Budô, we inform students of the proper answer after the “torment”, of making them think for themselves. Some things must be learned through suffering or they will be forgotten for the rest of your life. We must all learn to solve our own difficult problems. Furthermore, in Budô, we suffer great pains to master the best techniques. It was through the pains and labors of our ancestors, who became the founders of our traditions, that these techniques were invented.

---

“Nowadays it is easy for anyone to join a Dōjō, but in the old days the master would measure a student’s determination, make them swear an oath and sign in blood, and only then admit them.”
Nagato先生

---

“ Many people look at my training and say ” that hurts.” Then when they train with me , they feel that it hurts and don’t want to come back. It is very important to get used to getting hit and learning to deal with it. Otherwise, how could you survive in a real fight.” 
Nagato先生

---

“I would like to state clearly to all people treading the way of the martial arts: if you do not possess a Budoka’s heart, leave the martial arts! I say this on the basis of what I have gained from decades of teaching, because it has all been proved by the words Takamatsu Sensei spoke.
The martial arts are not something you can learn. The starting point is your own effort and endurance, and if you do not realize this, no matter how many years you train and what grade you reach, you will lack the value perceptions of a martial artist. Without this self‑awareness, even l0th Dans are equivalent to people without either Dan or Kyu. This is the Shinken‑gata of the Bujinkan grades.
People who do not grasp the true nature of a martial artist may well go to some trouble to knock on my door and request training, but unless they search for the heart of a martial artist, my teachings will fall on deaf ears. Yes, let us write Budoka as “Martial flower”, and leave it as one solution to Kaj`o‑chikusei, the puzzle of enlightenment which you are all questing after."
宗家Masaaki Hatsumi.

---

"You are not punching them; it is your going into kamae that punches them."
- Masaaki Hatsumi

---

"If you do something and it saves your life, it was good Taijutsu. In a real fight, you aren’t worried about what’s pretty."
- Masaaki Hatsumi

---

Put your heart and soul into consistent training.
By 宗家 Masaaki Hatsumi
In order to master any form of art, whether martial or aesthetic, consistent everyday training is crucial. It is well known that in the world of traditional Japanese Kabuki theater. The actors who portray female characters on stage (there are no actresses in Kabuki; male actors alone take all roles) maintain their feminine mannerisms even in daily life off stage.
What is the appropriate attitude for martial artists concerning consistent training? Bufu-Ikkan, or “consistent warrior living”, is my only advice. Naturally, this is all I can say no matter how the question is put to me – Do not give up. Keep going!
From my earliest years in the world of martial training, it was my goal to be truly good. In striving to attain that goal, I trained in the physical techniques three times as hard as a normal student. I devoted three times the normal mental effort in coming to a living understanding of the martial arts. I invested three times the normal amount of money that most students would spend in order to obtain the insights I needed. I trained fanatically and consistently and I became strong. As I found myself attaining the strength I had sought, however, I curiously enough came to discover a subtle new form of weakness in myself. I searched diligently for the roots of this suspicion of weakness. But I could never seem to get to the bottom of the question. I was truly at a loss. Nonetheless, I firmly believed in the validity of the teachings of the martial tradition behind my art, so I was sure that my continuing consistent training would eventually lead me to the enlightenment I sought. I just kept on training. I kept going.
One day, an invisible insidious enemy attacked, and I found myself struggling against a serious illness that had set in against my body. I knew in my heart that I faced a survival situation so dangerous that the outcome would literally be life or death. Simply standing up straight required a huge amount of energy. At times, my vision failed completely. I struggled to regain my health for five years. Sometimes, the demands were so great that I found myself thinking that death would be a much easier route than living.
In the depths of that dark period, I discovered that my previous strength, the vital and virile martial power that I worked so hard to cultivate, was indeed a false strength. My previous power depended entirely on my being in peak health. When my health began to decline, my power began to vanish with it. Power that is at best conditional or temporary is not true power at all. It is merely the illusion of power.
Despite my weakened condition, I kept going with my training in the warrior arts. I never quit. Slowly, I began to regain my health. Eventually I recovered from the illness that drained me so for five years of my life. Looking back on my period of illness and recovery, I came to realize that I had consistently kept at my training the whole way through, no matter what my condition, no matter how weak or drained I had felt.
From this experience, I learned the value of consistent training – adjusting the methods, pace, and focus to fit my body and mind no matter what the state of my mental and physical health. I now know that there is in consistent training a series of developmental stages appropriate for all the stages of life. There is an appropriate way to train when you are young and vigorous. There is an appropriate way to train as you enter the advanced years of your life. There is an appropriate way to train when you are ill, and there is an appropriate way to train when it seems that no training will fit. Even facing death at the close of life is a form of training; most people get caught between their fear of death and their hopes for immortality. Accepting the inevitability of death as something natural at that moment is a form of training for the warrior. Consistent training, ever fitting the goal to the means at hand, is the only way to cultivate the true strength that transcends all limitations.
Five years of struggling with illness led me to discard any concern with comparative values of what others would conventionally brand as strength as opposed to weakness, speed as opposed to slowness. In the grander scheme of things, from the higher divine levels of vision, the ultimate form of strength is a totally relative concept. I learned the power of “natural and fitting technique” a higher form of strength that transcends the conventional strength of raw physical power or even mental willpower that is so often the only thing taught in conventional martial arts schools.
In your training career, there may come a time when you find yourself frustrated and disgusted with what you feel to be your own dullness. You just can not get the techniques right. Your training just does not seem to go the way you want it to. I consider this slump period to be absolutely necessary for your own growth. Your sense of frustration and constriction leads you to the breakthrough you need for advancement. Like a snake that struggles to shed it’s skin so that it can grow larger, the martial artist too must pass these inevitable stages of molting for growth.
This moulting period can be a dangerous time for the unwary, however. Because of the frustration experienced in working through your current training barrier, no matter what it is, you can become an easy victim to the seductive allure of all the other martial technique systems that suddenly seem to appear to be so much more desirable or more glamorous than your own system. Just as one child is always more impressed with the toys of another child, it is a common weakness for students of our art to reach a point of “tough going” and then suddenly look to the other martial arts as a form of distraction. Anything and everything else suddenly looks so good.
Use your commitment to consistency to work through these difficult periods. Keep going. On the other hand, however, it is of course necessary to realize that not everyone is destined to be a master of this art. You have to know the difference between working through a difficult period as part of the growth process, and struggling pointlessly with a hopeless goal. If your feelings of frustration and constriction stretch out for ten years, it is perhaps wise to re-evaluate your commitments. Perhaps this is not the art for you after all.
Train from the beginning with a sincere heart directed by proper motivation. It is pointless to work at the martial arts with the mere intention of collecting as many techniques as possible. This form of consistent concentration of course lacks the counter balance of the power of observation. Training for experience without awareness will only produce a martial arts scholar – one who is no more than a walking technique catalog with no real heart.

---

At times during the 2024 Portland Taikai, Nagato Sensei sat to receive a variety of questions from students.
Each question simply returned to the idea of ‘not over thinking’ or rather, to develop ones patience and endurance to allow things to naturally unfold. As a result, the answers will come when the time is right. Rather than quieten the mind,trust the teachings and just practice to reveal the secrets, people seem to want to hear the answer without practicing hard to truly discover and understand it with their entire being. I sensed that having Gaman 我慢 or Nintai 忍耐 ( endurance,patience,self restraint/control ) was the overlying theme for the three days. Through the questions asked, it felt that this had yet to be really understood. Mysteriously, the Gokui written by sensei for the Taikai cleary expressed the need to relinquish oneself and have the patience to listen and accept the lessons from Kami 神. 
なす技を（なすわざを Nasu waza o)
己が力と(おのがちからと ono ga chikara to）
人の云う（ひとのいう hito no iu)
神の導く(かみのみちびく kami no michibiku）
身と知らずして（みとしらずして　mito shirazu shite)
Hatsumi Sensei’s passage below also gives an insight into this path of transcendence 自然の超越 to become closer and harmonise to the will of the natural world and universal process.
南虎
“When you feel like you are “stuck” (八方塞) in your life, you must remember that if you give up, you are finished. The important thing is, "don't think in your head, don't reject anything, rely on your senses and act with mushin”, you will surely find a path and you’ll be able to get through difficult situations. This is heijoushin.”
宗家Hatsumi

---

"If you will let go of strength and you will let go of speed, you will start to be able to use Kūkan 空間 (the space)."
- Masaaki Hatsumi

---

"Don't have a fixed idea in your head (that you have to use this or that technique). Use everything you've learned until now."
- Masaaki Hatsumi

---

"It's not a question of this technique working or that technique being 'cool.' The most important thing is to survive."
- Masaaki Hatsumi

---

"Taijutsu's very free with its movement. Nothing's set. There is no strong and weak. The most important thing is to survive."
- Masaaki Hatsumi

---

“The martial way is about not giving up, and therein lies the secret. ..
Pursuing the martial way demands the composure of a warrior's heart. Even with mind, body, and skill as one (shin-gi-tai-ichi).”
Masaaki Hatsumi, 
Unarmed Fighting Techniques of the Samurai


---

“If you don't understand the first movement I showed you, how can you expect to be able to do the next movement? Develop one stage at a time... Life is the same way. That's what I am teaching.”
宗家Masaaki Hatsumi

---

"The enemy who is against the laws of nature will lose his battle before he begins to fight. The first priority to the Ninja is to win without fighting."
- Masaaki Hatsumi

---

"Training is a promise. You trust that your partner won't hurt you, and you do so in return. Take things slow and practice them properly. It will do you no good to create bad habits by practicing improperly.
Just punch straight, and if your tori does not move at the right time and at the right distance, he will get hit. And you, as an uke, should not be afraid to be hit. There is no shame in being hit…
..In a real fight, you will be hit and you must not be shocked by contact. Being hit lets you know that you did something wrong and need to work on it until you get it right. Simply practice properly."
- Nagato 先生

---

"You’ve got to learn to utilize the space Kukan 空間 (between you and your opponent). Distancing is very important."
- Masaaki Hatsumi

---

“Just make a decision and do it. It’s simple.”
~ Nagato 先生

---

"The heart of taijutsu is important and only through training will one polish that heart (like a gem) and understand true taijutsu." 
-Takamatsu Toshitsugu

---

"The way of the martial artist is the way of enduring, surviving and prevailing over all that would destroy him. More than delivering strikes and slashes, and deeper in significance than the simple outwitting of an enemy, Ninpo 忍法 is the way of attaining that which we need while making the world a better place. The skill of the Ninja is the art of winning."
-Toshitsugu Takamatsu

---

“It is very important you all have and protect the Budô heart. You are not to be politicians. You are not to be salesmen. You are to be, first and foremost, martial artists. Everything else is secondary to that. That is my wish.”
宗家Masaaki Hatsumi

---

There is no secret in the Budo. The only secret is keep going!
- Masaaki Hatsumi

---

“Be proud but not too proud.”
宗家Nagato

Fudômyo-o is the wrathful deity protecting Budoka and persons on Shugyô to keep them on a righteous and worthy road. By cutting away ignorance, avarice, indolence, and binding arrogance, insolence, and contempt, etc, Fudômyo-o is there to strongly ensure that we don’t become distracted and led astray from the stony path of true awakening and higher consciousness.

---

Sanshin No Kata (三心の型):

The Sanshin no Kata consists of five distinct movements, each named after an element:
Chi no Kata (Earth)(地の型): Often involves a downward-upward strike or a sinking movement. 
Sui no Kata (Water) (水の型): May involve an outward-inward movement or a circular motion. 
Ka no Kata (Fire) (火の型): Can be an inward-outward movement or a strike with a twisting motion. 
Fu no Kata (Wind) (風の型): May involve a piercing strike or a more angled attack. 
Ku no Kata (Void) (空の型): Often a kick or a movement that seems to disappear. 

Three Training Methods:
Each movement is practiced using three different approaches:
Shoshin Gokei (Beginner's Mind) (初心五型) : Focuses on the basic form and mechanics of each movement. From a practical sense, this could be viewed as the most rudimentary level of the training where a beginner begins to develop the primary or base movement of Gyokko Ryu. Each kata is done consciously to condition the hand and leg coordination of the body. Simply put, the student is learning how to perform each movement. 
However, we can dig a little deeper by looking at the choice of naming this level as “Shoshin”; in Zen Buddhism this phrase means to have an open mind when studying a subject. To have Shoshin is to leave any preconceptions behind and to view the subject fresh every time. When Shiraishi Sensei demonstrated the Sanshin, he performed with a sensation of almost falling forward in addition to his “foot, spine, hand” methodology. When Noguchi Sensei demonstrated it, there was an emphasis on swinging the arms to generate momentum. Someya Sensei emphasized proper shifting of weight and angling of attack. While the core movements were the same for each, emphasis changed, as each shared what they felt at the time was the hidden value of the movement.

Gogyo no Kata (Five Elements) (五行の型 ): Explores the movement from the perspective of each element, potentially adding nuances and variations.  When the 5 movements are practiced as Gogyo no Kata, they are performed against an opponent. At this level, a student learns how the theory of the base movement translates into training against an opponent. The Gogyo forces the student to take timing, distance, and other factors into account when applying the technique against an attacker. The movements should only be adjusted minimally to apply them, but never the less require adjustment; different height/reach of attackers may require adjustment in distance and foot work, the attack itself may require a different vector of attack, the strike may need to be adjusted depending on the opening and distance, etc. etc. The point is to fine-tune the base movements, as well as learn how to adapt when conditions vary.
Goshin no Kata (Enlightened Mind) (悟心の型): Emphasizes the fluid and adaptable application of the movement in different situations. The last level is Goshin; the wisdom mind. Here, the kata are performed as a method of meditation to obtain enlightenment. While the first two levels require conscientious focus to develop and adapt correct movement, this stage almost requires the absence of conscious thought; the movements are done continuously – moving in and out of each kata spontaneously – until the practitioner obtains a moment of “enlightenment”.

Enlightenment in this sense would be some kind of epiphany. Almost universally, meditation involves some aspect of quieting the mind, and the Sanshin in this case is used as a vehicle for that. I believe this has two functions; first you’re training your body to move unconsciously, and secondly you’re allowing yourself to observe your movement in an abstract and detached way.  

Core Principles:
The Sanshin no Kata emphasizes:
Natural Movement: Movements should be fluid, flowing naturally from one to the next. 
Balance and Stability: Maintaining a stable base and proper body mechanics is crucial. 
Offline Movement: Moving offline (not directly towards the opponent) to create distance and opportunities. 
Energy Generation: Understanding how to store and release energy effectively within the body. 

---

Shuhari (守破離) is a Japanese concept, particularly relevant in martial arts, that describes the stages of learning and progression towards mastery. It outlines a journey from strict adherence to tradition to innovative independence. 
Here's a breakdown of the three stages: 
Shu (守) - Obey/Protect:
This initial stage focuses on learning the fundamental techniques and principles of a martial art through diligent practice and imitation of the teacher's instructions. The student adheres strictly to the established forms and teachings, developing a solid foundation.
Ha (破) - Detach/Break Away:
In this stage, the student, having mastered the basics, begins to explore variations and adaptations of the techniques learned. They start to understand the underlying principles and develop their own interpretations, potentially deviating from the strict forms.
Ri (離) - Transcend/Separate:
This final stage signifies a complete understanding and mastery of the art. The practitioner transcends the need for formal structures and techniques, acting instinctively and creatively, often developing their unique style.
Shuhari - martial art concept which describes the stages of ...
Shuhari is not a linear path but rather a cyclical process. Practitioners may revisit earlier stages as they continue to refine their skills and deepen their understanding. While its origins are in martial arts, Shuhari has been applied to various fields, including traditional arts, business, and software development. 

---













