Shuriken Throwing Basics

There are two basic ways to use the shuriken: 

Daken-jutsu    Throwing techniques 
Shoken-jutsu   Hand-to-hand techniques 

These methods are really two possible outcomes of the same exact circumstance: A blade (or any object) is hidden in the hand of a person who must defend himself from an armed attacker. This is an important concept in our training. When we practice, we try to cultivate a sense of preparedness for any use, not just throwing.

Daken-jutsu    Throwing Techniques
A shuriken can be any object, it does not have to be a blade. It could be a pencil, chopstick, paintbrush or a tool. The shuriken may be thrown without preparation or hesitation. In this respect, it is faster than the bow and arrow, the sword or even the gun. A shuriken can allow you to hit an enemy 
who is too far away for punching or kicking. There is an effective limit to this ability, however, which is usually ten meters. In budo, distance is measured in ken, which is equal to the length of one tatami mat or the distance the average swordsman can reach with his sword held out at arm’s length, approximately 70 inches (180 cm).

The length of your throw is determined by measuring the distance between your front foot and the target at the time of the release. In the old budo schools, the practiced limit for shuriken-jutsu was three tatami mats’ length. (sangen) which is about 17 feet (5.4 meters ). In a real fight, this is not much distance. It is a good idea to be able to throw from slightly further distances, such as 22 feet (7.2 meters) (yongen) and 29 feet (9 meters) (goken). 

When a human throws an object, his arm moves in a circle. The arm is a line that is stationary at one end, the shoulder, and may move freely from there. Punching tends to be a straight, extending movement. Punching can generate a lot of power, but throwing generates great speed. Throwing a shuriken is not done by extending the arm towards the target. Shuriken are thrown by moving the arm in a circular motion, much like throwing a baseball. Because the arm rotates during the throwing motion, the object that is being thrown will also rotate. The art of shuriken-jutsu is the art of controlling the rate at which thrown objects will rotate as they fly through the air.

The arm rotates, so the shuriken also rotates.

Shuriken, like all other missiles, are subject to gravity and exhibit a parabolic flight path. If one were to simply “push” the shuriken straight at the target, it would simply bounce off, having turned in flight because of low speed, gravity and uncontrolled rotation. The success of the throw depends 
upon your ability to control the velocity and speed of rotation. Once you master this concept, you will become able to throw almost any linear object with success.

There are three ways to throw the bo shuriken: 

1. Jikidaho    (direct hit)
2. Hantendaho    (reverse hit) 
3. Takaitendaho    (fast spinning, like knife throwing)

Japanese schools employ jikidaho or hantendaho for bo shuriken and takai-tendaho for shaken shuriken. 

Jikidaho    Direct Hit Throwing
Jikidaho is the direct hit method of throwing. This means that the shuriken is held with the tip pointing out, away from the palm. When you throw the shuriken, it leaves your hand with its point in the air and its tail towards the ground. As it flies, it turns slowly, so that the  shuriken is horizontal just before it strikes the target.

The jikidaho grip: The shuriken lies between the first and second fingers. The thumb presses the shuriken against the base of the third finger. The butt of the shuriken rests against the palm near the base of the thumb. (Above that upside-down “Y.”) This is one of the reasons that bo shuriken 
of square cross-section are so much easier to throw than other designs. The facets of the blade cause it to fit perfectly in the gap between your first and second fingers. It also keeps the shuriken from sliding around during the throw and provides two flat surfaces for your fingers to brush during the release. The jikidaho method is the basis for many other throws, so it is important to master it.

The shuriken is released and it turns 90 degrees as it flies. This is a basic idea common to many shuriken schools. The Meifu Shinkage Ryu, however, employs a pushing with the palm against the base of the shuriken in its throw. 
Not only that, but the arm is flexed up and down and the wrist is snapped. This refined technique gives the shuriken a very fast, flat trajectory. The Meifu Shinkage Ryu shuriken is smaller than most: the size and shape were developed to take advantage of the school’s unique palm-pushing method.

This is the basic throwing grip.

Hantendaho    Reverse Hit Throwing
If you change the direction of the shuriken in your hand so that the point is touching your palm, this is the “hantendaho grip.” The shuriken, when thrown, will turn 180 degrees in the air before striking the target. This technique does not employ high-speed throwing techniques like the jikidaho 
throw. (No pushing with the palm, obviously, as you would impale yourself on the shuriken) The feeling of this throw is very similar to that of the curveball in baseball. 

Hantendaho is really just for practice in the Meifu Shinkage Ryu; it is a good way for beginners to enjoy throwing at a target from longer distances until they have mastered the jikidaho throw. It is also used for combat throwing with the heavier blades in other schools, like the Chishin Ryu.


Throwing Practice
Before you begin throwing, make sure that you have a matching set of clean, sharp blades. They should all be the exact same type, length, and weight. Try not to make too much noise when picking them up or putting them down. If you must speak while people are training, do so in a quiet voice. You do not want to distract someone who is throwing a live weapon nearby. Always use common sense.

Similar to some other martial arts, the practice of shuriken-jutsu begins from a natural, peaceful state. Try to cultivate a sense of calmness and serenity. This is the beginning, the kamae (attitude) of patience and non-hostility. When walking and standing, the shuriken should always be carried in the dominant hand or tucked into the obi. This is done for safety. The shuriken are in your dominant hand, but you keep them and your intentions secret.

Once you approach the target and are ready to begin, make sure you are holding the blades correctly, while in a natural stance (shizentai). With the back straight and with both hands curled in a light fist on the sides of the hips, face forward (towards the target) and quietly bow. 

This is the stance before beginning (kamae). Take a half step and transfer the shuriken.

Upon completing the bow, lightly take one step forward, transferring the blades from the throwing hand to the other hand. Do this very slowly and carefully. The shuriken should still be point-down. 

With the shuriken in the left hand, extend the left arm towards the target. The left arm should be pointing straight towards the target and the right hand should be resting on the right hip.

Left arm is extended toward the target. Bring the first blade to the right hand.

When you are ready, transfer one blade to the right hand by bringing the left hand down to the right. Bring the left arm back towards the target. Imagine your left arm is a rifle aimed at the target.

The right hand holds one shuriken at the right hip. It may seem difficult to acquire the correct throwing grip on the shuriken in this position, but with practice, it will become natural. 

To raise your right hand for throwing, slide it up the right side of your body until the inside of your throwing wrist is firmly pressed against the side of your head above your ear. This is called the anchor point. It is important to keep your hand at the anchor point when you begin the throw to ensure 
consistency in your wrist angle and attitude. 

Put one blade in the right hand. This is the ready position for throwing.

Slide it up at a down-angle so as not to stick yourself with the point. You want to hide the fact that you are going to throw it. You may want to watch your own shadow and see if you can minimize the visible movement. Keep your right elbow in close. Keep your wrist cocked back so that the shuriken 
remains pointing up like an antennae. When the shuriken is raised, face the palm inwards and adopt a posture that conceals the shuriken within the hand. The shuriken should not be exposed until it is actually thrown.

As much as possible, you don’t want to reveal to the opponent that you have a shuriken and are preparing to throw it at him. If he sees it, he will evade it.

When you are ready to throw, you will take a half-step forward with the left foot. At the same time you pull your left hand back to your left hip and swing your throwing hand across your body to meet your left hand at your left hip. The throwing arm moves in a circular motion and is only stopped when it strikes the left hip. You may want to practice without any shuriken, trying to slap your left hip with your right hand.

Do it so that the slap makes a noise and the movement is smooth. 

The beginning of the throw. Brushing the blade away.

During the throw, keep your throwing hand cocked back so that the shuriken points at the sky throughout the throw. The shuriken will slide out of your hand, you do not “let go.” As it slides away, you will brush the back of the blade with your fingertips to control its rotation. 

Do not try to “throw” the shuriken and do not extend your arm towards the target. The wrist stays vertical and the arm moves in a circle. This seems to be difficult for many people, so have someone observe you during practice to make sure that you are doing it correctly. Even an untrained eye can tell you if your shuriken is pointed straight up, if your wrist stays cocked back, and if your right arm is moving smoothly to your left hip during the throw.

Follow through on the throw. Getting the next blade ready to throw.

If your right hand does not strike your left hip at the end of the throw, then you threw incorrectly. If you are a beginner, it is not important whether or not the shuriken sticks in the target. What matters is acquiring a feeling for the movement of the throw. The desire to sink your blades into the target is very strong and perfectly understandable, after all, that’s why we do it, but that desire is something you will have to control if you want to be successful. It seems like a contradiction, but budo is full of contradictions that you must simply accept and learn from. Follow the form and eventually you will have a “eureka” moment and the blades will start sticking.

After the first shuriken has been thrown, you should find both of your hands together at your left hip. At this time, you take the next shuriken from your left hand into your right hand. 

Then, you step back into your original throwing position with the left arm straight towards the target and the right hand pressed into the side of your head. You will repeat this process until you have thrown your last shuriken.

When you are training, you may throw all of your shuriken. In a fight, you should never throw the last shuriken. You keep it so that you will have a weapon for shoken-jutsu. In a way, all but one of your shuriken are for throwing. One of them must be thought of as unthrowable. Of course, you never know what’s going to happen, maybe you’ll have to throw it, but it is always a good idea to hold something back.

After the last shuriken has been thrown in combat, you will draw your sword. This is the reason the right hand is brought to the left hip after each throw. The sword is carried at the left hip. After you throw the last shuriken in training, you will perform zanshin. Both hands are opened and the right 
palm faces up near the belly. Lean forward slightly and turn the right hand over. (Both palms down). Take a moment to “feel” the surroundings without looking or moving. Then, slowly, bring your arms up in front of you and make an “X.”

Getting the next blade ready to throw.

This is similar to a kamae (posture) called jumonji. Jumonji means “In the shape of the number ten,” which, in Japanese, is like an X. It is a Japanese tradition in martial arts to carry nine shuriken, so the number ten can mean “the end.” (It doesn’t matter how many shuriken you actually have). 

Your position after the last blade is thrown. Lean forward and turn the right hand over.

Form the jumonji. Bow to the target.

After throwing it’s important to maintain the feeling.

You assume the shape of jumonji to express the idea that the violence is finished. (Jumonji also happens to be a defensive posture one can use in hand-to-hand combat.) You might want to consider that, in a real fight, you may have just killed someone. Just because you are done fighting does not mean that the event is over for you. You will have to live with what you have done for the rest of your life. If you have really bad luck, you may have to live with it in prison.

After jumonji, stand up straight, feet together, fists on hips, and bow to the target.

Before you walk to the target to retrieve your shuriken, it is imperative that you make sure everyone else is finished throwing, lest a stray shuriken hit you! If it is safe, then you may approach the target and pick them up. 
Pull out the stuck shuriken first and then pick up the shuriken that are on the ground. (You never know when one will fall out and hit you in the back of the head.) Pick them all up and carry them in your right hand, point-down.

Depending on the teacher’s wishes, you may be allowed to keep practicing or you may have to let someone else use the target. If that is the case, then you say, kotae, which means it is someone else’s turn.

This is the basic throw. There are advanced levels that you will learn that will lead you to the secret of Someya Sensei’s unsurpassed technique, but if any part of your basic throw is not mastered, you will never get there. 


The Iga Ryu teppan can be thrown in a manner similar to the bo shuriken except for the release. During the release, your right hand will twist slightly clockwise and your index finger and thumb will do the brushing. You still have to keep your wrist at the proper angle and brush the back of the blade, but it will be much easier to do with these heavy, wide and aerodynamic shuriken. The blade flies with the flat side facing the target. The Iga Ryu blade is basically a wing and aerodynamic forces will help straighten it during flight. The feeling of throwing the Iga Ryu blade is very different from a bo shuriken, but once you get it, they seem very easy to throw, like paper airplanes. You may wish to have a special target used only for these blades, because they can cause a great deal of damage.

---

Shaken Shuriken

There were dozens of shaken designs, many of which had different purposes. Some were purely throwing weapons, some for hand-to-hand and throwing and some were used to deliver burning fuses, secret messages and even poison. Most had four points, some had 5, 6 and even 8 points, but the more points there were, the more difficult it was to throw and the less damage the shuriken would cause. There are two main kinds of shaken shuriken: Piercing blades and cutting blades. Piercing blades are made of thicker metal (.1 to .2 inches/4mm to 6mm) and have longer, more slender points. Cutting blades are made of thinner metal (.03 to .07 inches/1mm to 2mm) and often have smaller, knife-like points. Some are designed only to “stick,” some are designed only to cut. All shaken are capable of piercing 
or cutting. When we refer to cutting or piercing, we refer to the nature of the wounds they create in human flesh, not to their performance in practice targets. This is not a sport; these are not sporting goods. Never judge the capability of a weapon solely by its performance on inanimate target materials. 

The shaken is often thought of as an “easy” weapon to throw. It is in fact easier to stick in the target because of its many points, but developing power and accuracy in the throw is, in the author’s opinion, more difficult than with the bo shuriken. Because of their wider, more dangerous shapes, 
shaken are also more diffi cult to carry than bo shuriken. The traditional number of blades to be carried was nine, but anyone who thought they would actually need a lot of shuriken would carry as many as they could. 

The shaken with holes in the center could be strung together with a piece of cord. The shaken without holes could be carried between the folds of the wide obi (sash) worn around the waist. A samurai might only carry two or three but a ninja might carry more than a dozen, secreted in various pockets all over his body. 

Senban shuriken can be carried by tying them to a cord or rope.

For a ninja, the shuriken was far more than just a throwing weapon. The manner in which it was carried could serve a purpose. If the shuriken were placed in pockets over vital areas such as the chest, the back of the neck or the forearms, then they would serve as a kind of secret armor against sword cuts. They could be tied to the soles of their shoes as a kicking weapon. In these cases, they did not have to serve with 100% effectiveness; they only needed to work well enough to help you survive. Remember that Japanese armor was made of iron plate about .03 inches (1mm) thick. A shaken was 
usually .03 to .07 inches (1 to 2mm) thick. It would stop a sword cut just as well as any armor of that time and place.

Senban shuriken can be used as secret armor when tied together along the arm.

The method of throwing both kinds of shaken is similar, but with a few differences owing to the different weights and shapes. The Meifu Shinkage Ryu is primarily a bo shuriken school, but Someya Sensei did train with a kind of juji shaken, (cruciform shuriken) a piercing blade that was popular with many of the old budo schools. That throw will be presented here. Then we will have a look at the senban throw of Togakure Ryu (a cutting blade).

The basic grip resembles the “pistol” gesture: index finger straight, the rest of the fingers curled in. The tip of the index finger should lie just over the forward edge (not point) of the shuriken. This grip applies to almost any shaken. The index finger and the wrist cause the blade to spin, not the movement of the arm.

The juji shaken does not have cutting edges so the release for that blade is simpler than the Togakure Ryu senban. The Togakure Ryu senban requires a turning of the hand to keep the rear edges from slicing the palm as it flies away.

---

Togakure Ryu Senban

The Togakure Ryu senban is a much thinner (.06 inches/1.6mm) piece of metal than the thick juji shaken (.23 inch/6mm). It is more of a cutting weapon than a piercing weapon. Because of this, and its light weight, it needs to be spun very rapidly in flight. The throw is much smaller and faster than a 
juji shaken. These blades, because of their light weight and thin profile, are also capable of being thrown side-hand very effectively.

They are often employed in greater numbers than the thicker, larger piercing-type shaken. As many as a dozen are drawn and held in the left hand in preparation for the right hand to draw them, one or two at a time, and throw them.

First we will look at the overhand throw and then we will discuss the sidehand throw.


The upper arm and wrist snap forward and back, moving as little as possible. You don’t want your arm to move too far forward or the blade will go into the ground. Try not to let your upper arm move at all during the throw. Snap the wrist forward and back about 10 inches (25 cm) at most. As you snap the wrist forward, your hand is going to turn inward so that your palm is facing you and your thumb is pointing up. The hand is turned inwards to allow the senban to clear your thumb without cutting you. As 
long as you don’t try to “hold” the senban, but merely allow it to “perch,” the blade will not turn inwards with your hand. It will keep rotating and fly straight to the target. Try to think of your hand as a “tool” that simply propels and spins the blade, not as a hand that is gripping and releasing something. It might even help to visualize one of those skeet throwers — it does not “hold” the skeet, it merely casts it.

Below is the overhand senban throw again, this time with no blade. Notice how, as the wrist snaps forward, the palm turns to the inside. If the palm does not turn, the bottom point will cut you as the blade begins to spin. Before the throw, the thumb is on the left hand side of the blade. As the throw begins, the thumb moves to the center. At the end of the throw, the thumb is all the way to the right.

The most common problem you may encounter is moving your arm too much during the throw. Note the short distance the arm moves.

To counter this, you may train with your left arm horizontal in front of your chest. Keep it in place as a “bumper” for your right arm. Eventually you will be able to throw without even touching your left arm.

Use the non-throwing arm as a bumper. 

The sidehand throw is somewhat unique to the Togakure Ryu. It is a very surreptitious movement where the throw is completed close to the body and hidden by the sleeves. In order for the shuriken to fly accurately sidehand, it must be spun very quickly. Hatsumi Sensei recommends practicing the throw with business cards. First we will look at the grip and then the throw from in front and behind the thrower. The reason we will look at the throw from behind is to see how the body and the arms hide the throw. Done properly, the throw will be invisible from behind and hard to see from in front. 

To begin, the senban should be held in the left hand, pressed against to the body. The right hand should also be kept pressed into the belly, low and inconspicuous. The right hand will slide the top senban off into the right palm and form the tenouchi.

Hold senban in the left hand. Slide out the first senban. 

The sidehand grip is formed by supporting the underside of the senban with the side of the middle finger, pressing down with the thumb and “hooking” the side of one point with the index finger. Be careful where you put your index finger. The senban will rotate around the index finger. 
This is what gives the sidehand throw such a high rate of spin. It does not rotate on its point, however. It rotates around the side of the point where it pushes against the finger. If you put your finger on the point, it will cut you when you throw it.

The right wrist then snaps quickly in the direction of the target. It is important to remember that this throw is a hidden movement, so if your target is to your left, you need to turn your body to the left to hide the throw. 
The elbow should stay in contact with your body during the throw. What makes the Togakure Ryu sidehand throw so unique is that it is the only shuriken throwing method that requires the arms to stay low, close to the body and well below the armpits.

The right wrist then snaps quickly in the direction of the target. It is important to remember that this throw is a hidden movement, so if your target is to your left, you need to turn your body to the left to hide the throw. The elbow should stay in contact with your body during the throw. 
What makes the Togakure Ryu sidehand throw so unique is that it is the only shuriken throwing method that requires the arms to stay low, close to the body and well below the armpits.


We don’t want any movement visible from the rear, and only minimal movement from the front. Note in the pictures above how the wrist turns but the arm moves very little and stays close to the body. This is unusual for any kind of throwing weapon. What this does for the thrower is to make his shuriken a complete surprise to the opponent, magnifying the power of a piece of metal into a weapon of tremendous psychological impact.

You should follow the formal routine for throwing bo shuriken when you throw shaken. Shaken are dangerous weapons, more dangerous than bo shuriken, and need to be treated with the same respect you would afford a firearm. A throwing routine helps eliminate random and unpredictable movement. If you drop one, the probability of it sticking in someone’s foot is 300% higher than if you dropped a bo shuriken. Their many points snag on skin and clothing all too easily. All shuriken need to be kept off of the floor and out of the way when not in use.

---

